+++
title = 'Decision-Making in a Rock Band'
date = 2024-11-07T13:22:24+04:00
draft = false
+++

How do you run a rock band and avoid endless arguing, frustration and eventual
breakup? It's an age old question, and today I'm trying to answer it.

Specifically, I'm going to discuss unknown hobbyist bands where no members are
paid. It's the only situation that I'm familiar with. And it requires the
process itself to be comfortable and rewarding for everybody. There are no
financial/promotional insentives to stay otherwise.

And people don't! What's the average lifespan of a band/lineup? Like, 2 years?

## My 2 years in [Постоянные](https://band.link/postoyannyye)

When I joined, I was the most educated and skilled member. I was respected for
this. I had creative freedom to implement my ideas. We didn't have "too many
cooks in the kitchen". The guys didn't have as many musical ideas, or were
humble about them. This was great at the time, because I had a focused vision
for the upcoming [album](https://band.link/postoyannyye3) and the sound that I
wanted to explore.

And at the same time, I wasn't the formal leader, as in "the founding member" or
"the only person interested in pushing the project forward". This was great too,
because I wasn't responsible for *everything* the band has to do. My bandmates
were writing lyrics; organizing shows; handling social media and promotion;
finding photographers, videographers, album cover artists...

So far, sounds great. But, on the other hand:

- I was often mad at rehearsals and had to explain some things that seemed
  obvious to me.
- When re-watching our shows, I was often more disappointed in my bandmates'
  performance, rather than mine. And I still think that there were objective
  reasons for that.
- Similarly, when the time came to record the album, I was disappointed in the
  bassist's and the second guitarist's performances. I ended up recording their
  parts by myself. I wrote and demoed most of them anyway.
- As a result, that second guitarist felt strangled by my control and left the
  band. Eventually, we sorted things out and brought him back. But this episode
  demonstrates that something was wrong with my approach.
- And the process wasn't pleasant for me either. Including demos and rehearsals,
  the album took 1.5 years to make. And a lot of my effort too. It was worth it,
  but when it was done, I was terrified of going through the same process again.
  I didn't want to write and record the next one.
- I tried to change the process, let go of that control and rehearse some of the
  other guys' songs. But I didn't like those and ended up leaving the band. And
  afterwards, I also took an extended break from music during the *next* 2
  years.

## Pondering

What can this story teach us? How can a band keep playing together sustainably?
It's a hobby, after all. I do this for pleasure. It shouldn't cause all this
negativity and require extened breaks to recover.

Wouldn't my problems be solved if I found more skilled bandmates to play with?
Yes, *these* problems would be solved. But go back and re-read the advantages of
playing in that band. Why would skilled bandmates follow my every creative whim?
The team dynamic would be totally different. It would be a [herd of
cats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herding_cats). And those bands also argue
and break up all the time. See [The
Beatles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beatles), four absolutely talented
creative individuals who all contributed a lot, but also argued a lot and
eventually couldn't work together anymore.

In theory, you could find an individual who's good at music and has interesting
ideas, but has no focused creative vision that would conflict with the leader's
vision. Actually, this is my current role at
[Мало-Помалу](https://band.link/malo_pomalu_band)! But this is a delicate
balance that can change with time. What if I *do* develop a new contradicting
vision in the future? Does the band have to change its direction? Do we have to
start a new side-project and promote it from scratch? Do I need to assemble a
whole separate lineup, even though I like playing with my current bandmates? All
kinds of ugly questions arise.

## Effort and ambition should be matched with power

No creative input, no day-to-day effort = useless band member, dead weight.

A "leader" who puts in little day-to-day effort = usually, he's just an ["ideas
guy"](https://www.reddit.com/r/gamedev/comments/113k1fv/heres_a_thing_about_the_idea_guy_and_the_real/)
clown. Maybe, with some lineups this "philosophical guidance" might work? I
haven't seen this, though.

A "boring" reliable member with no burning vision = you usually need a few of
these, provided that you already have a creative leader. But beware of the case
when the leader is overwhelmed with responsibility, or the next case:

A member who puts in a lot of effort, wants to implement his own ideas, but his
ideas are ignored = a dangerous situation that needs to be prevented. A break up
typically follows.

An empowered creative leader who puts in a lot of effort = every band usually
needs at least one, but he can take too much responsibility and burn out or
alienate the other members. A band can have many, but they can start
conflicting.

## You need leadership and specialization

You may note that I bring up the "creative leader" a lot. That's because I think
that you typically need one and **full democracy usually doesn't work**. It
doesn't work because **voting on everything is exhausting and slow**.

Actually, my experience with Постоянные hasn't inspired me to write this post.
I'm writing it because of a very recent occasion in my current band,
Мало-Помалу. We're preparing a new single. The song is done, and we're currently
preparing the cover art. From the start, we already had a good "rough" idea that
everyone liked. And we already had an artist in mind. But despite this, it took
a lot of back-and-forth rounds of edits with the artist. And now I feel
exhausted. He had some own ideas, we discussed them with the band, had our own
little disagreements, and then voted and compiled a wishlist of edits to send
him back. And repeated this process a few times. In the end, we settled on a
compromise that's closer to the version that I voted against.

As I think about it now, that's expected. I didn't write this song. I'm not the
band leader. I'm not even competent in visual arts. **I don't have an authority
on *this* topic**. I care about this release because I really like the song, but
I shoudn't have got so invested in the cover art. In hindsight, I only wasted
everyone's time with these discussions. **We shouldn't discuss everything, vote
on everything and compromise on everything**. Specialize instead! Pick an area
that you're proficient in and passionate about, and *own it*. Save your
bandmates' time end energy! You've already heard about ["design by
committee"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_by_committee). Avoid it! Don't
drag discussions on topics that you don't *really* care about. Save your energy
too.

Out of interest, I compared my band to my team at work. And I noticed that we
barely ever vote at work. Especially among the whole 8-person team, rather than
a subset. And that's not because there's some overreaching manager who overrides
every decision. Quite the opposite! We have a team of specialists where everyone
is hired for a specific role. We trust them to do their job well, and they have
the final say in their responsibility area. We try to handle these areas by
ourselves and avoid needless communication overhead. The issues are escalated
and discussed if they fall outside of the personal responsibility area or the
person doesn't have the skills/knowledge to solve a specific issue. I think,
this is a very useful heuristic.

Another possible solution is picking a person who's responsible for the vision
on a single release, every aspect of it. To avoid burnout and slowdowns, you'll
probably have to rotate this role. Kinda like The Beatles alternated between
Lennon and McCartney taking the lead.

## I still prefer bands

Despite all of these complications, I prefer having a full band rather than a
solo project. I prefer playing shows with live drums. I prefer not having to
handle every single responsibility described in the
[section](#my-2-years-in-постоянныеhttpsbandlinkpostoyannyye) about Постоянные.
I prefer merging different creative ideas (even if not in equal proportions). I
prefer spending time with people.

---

## Related reading

- [Anyone has experience with this kind of decision-making in a
  band?](https://www.reddit.com/r/Bass/comments/80o1s8/anyone_has_experience_with_this_kind_of/)
- [Starting a Band: Part 3 — Decision Making for Petulant
  Children](https://tahoeonstage.com/backstage/starting-a-band-part-3/)
