+++
title = 'Destructure as a Reminder'
tags = ["rust", "tech"]
date = 2025-08-29
lastmod = 2025-08-30
summary = "A design pattern for long-lived Rust codebases."
+++

Here's a Rust trick that I use to save time and prevent bugs as the codebase
evolves. I'm probably not the first one to invent it.

## Problem statement

Say, you have a struct which is "a bag of fields", like a set of filters on an
e-commerce website:

```rust
use serde::Deserialize;

#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct ProductFilter {
    pub price_from: Option<usize>,
    pub price_to: Option<usize>,
}
```

You have an operation that needs to somehow "handle" every field:

```rust
use sea_orm::*;
use sea_query::*;

impl IntoCondition for ProductFilter {
    pub fn into_condition(self) -> Condition {
        let mut cond = Condition::all();
        if let Some(price_from) = self.price_from {
            cond.add(product::Column::Price.gte(price_from))
        }
        if let Some(price_to) = self.price_to {
            cond.add(product::Column::Price.lte(price_to))
        }
        cond
    }
}
```

Two years from now, your new junior colleague is assigned a task to add an "In
stock" checkbox. They add a new field to the API:

```rust
#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct ProductFilter {
    pub price_from: Option<usize>,
    pub price_to: Option<usize>,
    #[serde(default)]
    pub must_be_in_stock: bool,
}
```

The code compiles right away, but it doesn't do anything. **How do they navigate
your enterprise codebase and make sure that this new field is handled where it
needs to be handled?** [^filter-must-filter]

## The solution

Recognize this "all fields" pattern early, anticipate new fields in the future,
and write the original implementation like so:

```rust
impl IntoCondition for ProductFilter {
    pub fn into_condition(self) -> Condition {
        // Destructure without `..` to cause a compile error when a new field is added.
        // It will remind us to use the new field here.
        let ProductFilter { price_from, price_to } = self;

        let mut cond = Condition::all();
        if let Some(price_from) = price_from {
            cond.add(product::Column::Price.gte(price_from))
        }
        if let Some(price_to) = price_to {
            cond.add(product::Column::Price.lte(price_to))
        }
        cond
    }
}
```

The comment isn't just for the sake of the blog. I actually write an explanatory
comment when I do this. Here's a [real-world
example](https://github.com/SeaQL/sea-query/pull/977/commits/8044429c1d38040430a33d12443418d1509ed725#diff-78d1f4b688a8601055dfe7f8378079794c1e9f524ed506c315913584abcf8c2eR805)
from an open-source project.

Another cool benefit of this technique is that each field is bound to its own
local variable and the compiler warns you when they are unused. This can easily
happen after a refactoring or a sloppy copy-paste.

## Bonus: other solutions

If we take the original question seriously and ponder it, a few other solutions
come to mind. They have some flaws, but all of them can still be useful,
especially if you work in another language:

- Your colleague could ask you. <br><sup>(Interrupting your work, and let's hope
  that you know the right person, that they are still around, that they remember
  how this thing works, and that nothing has substantially changed since)</sup>
- You could anticipate this, document the `ProductFilter` type, and explain its
  usage in a comment. <br><sup>(And then that comment would get
  out-of-date)</sup>
- Nowadays, your colleague could ask an LLM instead. <br><sup>(With a chance to
  get back an imaginary method name)</sup>
- Your colleague could use Git history to find the commit that added one of the
  other fields. <br><sup>(Let's hope that nothing has substantially changed
  since, and that no other similar methods have been added)</sup>
- Your colleague could use their IDE to find references to this type or its
  other fields. <br><sup>(Let's hope that there aren't too many references and
  that there's no macro/reflection/tooling trickery that would mess with the
  language server 😩)</sup>
- Your colleague could use old-school text search. <br><sup>(Let's hope that all
  relevant code is in a single repo, and there aren't too many irrelevant
  results or non-matching camelCase/kebab-case/whatever variations of the
  identifier[^case-variations])</sup>
- Instead of destructuring, you could write a proc macro. Let's
  expand[^expand-pun] on this a little.

If the handling of each field is extremely repetitive and you don't need unique
logic for every field, you can write a proc macro that defines the function for
you and pastes a snippet of code for every field. That autogenerated function
will always handle every field. And a single macro can be reused for multiple
structs (if your processing is *that* repetitive).

`#[derive(Deserialize)]` from the above is a good example. It's a proc macro
that generates a function that fills every field from JSON (simply speaking).

But many functions can't be generalized like that. Our `ProductFilter` example
would have to somehow annotate the corresponding SQL operations anyway:

```rust
#[derive(Deserialize, MyIntoCondition)]
struct ProductFilter {
    #[opt_condition(column = product::Column::Price, op = ColumnTrait::gte)]
    pub price_from: Option<usize>,
    #[opt_condition(column = product::Column::Price, op = ColumnTrait::lte)]
    pub price_to: Option<usize>,
}
```

To me, this just screams overengineering. And [proc macros are bad for compile
times](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/1lcskhg/rust_compiler_performance_survey_2025_rust_blog/my5ktej/).

But this pattern has its place. `thiserror` is very nice. It achieves a similar
result to our destructuring, enforcing an `#[error(..)]` annotation on every
enum variant and raising a compile error otherwise.

Man, I love exhaustiveness checks.

---

## Related reading

["Rust Design Patterns"](https://rust-unofficial.github.io/patterns/intro.html)
is a good resource. It lists many similar useful techniques.

## Discuss

- [{{< icon "github" >}} Proposal to add to "Rust Design
  Patterns"](https://github.com/rust-unofficial/patterns/issues/452)
- [{{< icon "reddit" >}}
  r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/1n3hczf/destructure_as_a_reminder/?)
- [{{< icon "reddit" >}}
  r/programming](https://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/1n3jx7b/destructure_as_a_reminder/)
- [{{< icon "discourse" >}}
  users.rust-lang.org](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/destructure-as-a-reminder/133495)

[^filter-must-filter]: Granted, in this example it's obvious that *a filter must
do the filtering*, that such method already exists somewhere, and that we must
find it. But in more complex cases, multiple such methods could exist, and they
could exist for types that you wouldn't expect to have such methods.

[^case-variations]: I got burnt on this so many times that I often search as
`/Product.?Filter/i` right away.

[^expand-pun]: Ba-dum-tss! 🥁
