+++
title = 'Non-Profit FOSS Solves the Conflict of Interest'
tags = ["tech"]
date = 2025-07-16
lastmod = 2025-07-16
summary = "The developers have no incentive to enshittify the app!"
+++

Commercial software has an inherent conflict of interest between doing what's
best for the user and doing what profits the author the most. Eventually, most
commercial projects slide to the "profit" side of this scale. That's how we get
the famous concept of
["enshittification"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enshittification). That's
everywhere nowadays.

## Non-profits vs FOSS

From the user's point of view, the solution is simple: using non-commercial
software whenever possible. Its creators won't try to profit at your expense.
*They don't pursue profits*! This prevents enshittification by design.

This effect is often attributed to [free and open-source
software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_and_open-source_software). FOSS has
many great qualities, but this isn't actually one of them.
[^maintainer-disagreement]

Open source by itself doesn't guarantee that a project is non-commercial.
Sometimes, the creators still (understandably) try to profit from their work.
For example, by having an
[open-core](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-core_model) business model. If
they have a business model, the same conflict of interest comes up again.

The best case is when a piece of software is FOSS *and* maintained by a
non-profit organization with a clearly defined mission statement. If the
executives turn their backs on the mission and pursue profits instead, they can
be sued. [^kagi]

One such organization is [KDE e.V.](https://ev.kde.org/whatiskdeev/) - the
organization that manages the [KDE
projects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KDE_Projects).

[KDE Plasma](https://kde.org/plasma-desktop/) is so much better than Windows and
MacOS desktops at this point [^accessibility]. That's despite not having nearly
the same level of corporate backing! It's not even funny [^switch-to-kde]. And
it's free to use and modify, meaning that it also fosters an ecosystem of
variations, such as the current [SteamOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SteamOS)
desktop used in Valve's [Steam Deck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steam_Deck).
These variations can be created quickly and cheaply, reusing the same
battle-tested technical foundation. Everyone wins.

## Rewarding the maintainers

Open source reverses the equation and benefits the user at the expense of the
author. When open-source maintainers don't profit from their work, being a
maintainer becomes very hard and unsustainable.  That's a known problem. You
could call that "a conflict of interest" too.

We can solve this one too. Don't hesitate to donate to your favorite projects!
You're investing in your own future. You're investing in the quality of the
tools that you use every day.

This quality *can* be sustainable! It's not just a beautiful pipe dream. It's
already the reality today, and has been for a long time. KDE is 28 years old.
Blender is 31 years old. Linux is 33 years old. These non-commercial FOSS
projects keep evolving and delivering massive value, powering more and more of
the digital infrastructure that we use.

There are only 5-10 proprietary apps left across my entire desktop system. Note
that I use it for many "advanced" tasks, such as professional software
development in a remote work environment, amateur music production, video
editing, digital hoarding, note taking, dealing with legal (and other)
documents, and syncing all of that to the cloud ([which is FOSS
too](https://nextcloud.com/)).

KDE in particular improves my life so much that I voluntarily donate 5$/month
without ever questioning whether it's a "justified" subscription. Don't try to
"save the world". Start with a small, "insignificant", *unquestionable* sum.

Regular SaaS startups manage to survive on comparable sums, after all.

---

## Related reading

- ["In the long run, GPL code becomes
  irrelevant"](https://josephg.com/blog/in-the-long-run-gpl-code-becomes-irrelevant/)
  (as does properietary code. Follow the link for details)

Interesting ideas of alternative, FOSS-adjacent licenses or monetization
strategies:

- ["Introducing Sponsorware: How A Small Open Source Package Increased My Salary
  By $11k in Two Days"](https://calebporzio.com/sponsorware)
- ["Alternatives to Open Source"](https://simonsafar.com/2024/source_available/)

## Discuss

- [{{< icon "hackernews" >}} Hacker
  News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=44583953)
- [{{< icon "reddit" >}}
  r/foss](https://www.reddit.com/r/foss/comments/1m1gxeq/nonprofit_foss_solves_the_conflict_of_interest/?)
- [{{< icon "reddit" >}}
  r/kde](https://www.reddit.com/r/kde/comments/1m1gv4h/nonprofit_foss_solves_the_conflict_of_interest/?)
- [{{< icon "reddit" >}}
  r/linux](https://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/1m1gwv1/nonprofit_foss_solves_the_conflict_of_interest/?)

[^maintainer-disagreement]: Also, a FOSS license doesn't guarantee that the
    authors will always agree with you on the best direction for the project!

    However, you can be reasonably sure that this direction won't be actively
    hostile to you. If a project ever gets to that point, a fork emerges and you
    use a non-hostile fork. That's the real deal that you get with FOSS. That's
    the real power of FOSS. [It was never about the maintainers pleasing
    you](https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/tech/PopularityAndOSSMoralObligations).

[^kagi]: Another curious case is Public Benefit Corporations like
    [Kagi](https://blog.kagi.com/what-is-next-for-kagi#4). The law allows them
    to pursue their mission *in addition* to profits, and prevents the
    shareholders from suing them for not maximizing the profits at any cost.
    However, the relative importance of the mission vs profits is probably vague
    and impossible to enforce.

    At least, it's still possible to sue them for pursuing an unrelated mission
    that hurts *both* the profits and the original mission! I wish we could do
    that with [Mozilla
    Corporation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozilla_Corporation)...

[^accessibility]: Perhaps, apart from accessibility. But they're working on it
too.

[^switch-to-kde]: If you ever wondered about abandoning Windows and trying
    Linux, try a distro that uses KDE!

    [Kubuntu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kubuntu) was good enough for me to
    switch *five years ago*, when I was in the second year of my CompSci studies
    and barely had any special computer knowledge.
